FTX

FTX is a cryptocurrency derivatives exchange headquartered in the Bahamas and founded in May 2019 by Sam Bankman-Fried (CEO) and Gary Wang (CTO). Gary is an MIT grad with a degree in mathematics with Computer Science and was also a software engineer at Google where he built systems to aggregate prices across millions of flights, decreasing latency and memory usage by over 50%.  Sam Bankman also graduated from MIT with a degree in physics and a minor in mathematics. In 2017, Sam moved to Berkely where he worked at the Centre for Effective Altruism which is a nonprofit organization that researches careers that have the largest positive social impact and provides career advice based on that research. That same year he founded Alameda Research, a quantative trading firm and by 2018 he organized an arbitrage trade that was moving up to $25 million per day. In May of 2019, Sam and Gary started FTX and they have been the fastest-growing cryptocurrency exchange that offers advanced trading options.  In 2021, they acquired Blockfolio for $150 million and by July of 2022 FTX raised 900 million at a $18 billion valuation from over 60 investors.

FTX set out to correct several issues with futures exchanges with one being preventing clawbacks.  Clawbacks are provisions to prevent people from using incorrect information and are used to put a balance between community development and corporate welfare. FTX prevented clawbacks by adding a three-tiered liquidation model which closed positions with rate-limited liquidation orders in the market, applied a unique backstop liquidity provider program that jumps into accounts in danger of bankruptcy, and then leverages the insurance fund to prevent customer losses. The other challenge FTX set out to resolve was the tedious process of collateral having to be posted separately for different coins which means each account would have separate margin wallets to manage. They resolved this issue by utilizing one universal margin wallet with stablecoins for all derivative products and therefore having your profit and loss (PnL) in stablecoins as well. Utilizing the same base currency as collateral made it easier to rebalance. FTX then tackled the issues with poor liquidity, which is a common problem for newly launched future exchanges by backing FTX with his other company Alameda Research which is one of the top cryptocurrency liquidity providers, so in turn, FTX was liquid from day 1 and became one of the first exchanges to offer USDT futures. 

Another feature that made FTX stand out from its competitors was its Leveraged Token. Their Leveraged Token, an ERC20 token, made it possible for traders to take short or leveraged positions without having to trade on margin or futures exchanges.  This was done by creating a token that can 3x, -1x, and -3x short bitcoin, ETH, XRP, EOS, USDT, BNB, TRX, LEO, AND BCH. By doing this, traders can put on leveraged tokens efficiently without having their assets stored in a margin wallet.

On May 10, 2021, the Bloomberg.com article sites: "FTX posted more than $400 billion in trading volume in April, the firm said in a statement Monday.  That amounts to about $14 billion per day and marks a 25-fold increase from the same period last year" (Vildana Hajric). These are impressive numbers considering that FTX started in 2019, has only an estimated million traders, and only limited trading options for U.S. residents through FTX.Us exchange. Today, FTX is the third-largest crypto exchange by volume per coinmarketcap.com and growing. FTX also has an NFT marketplace on their exchange which sells concert posters, pictures and lifetime passes as NFT's, and next they will be launching FTX Gaming where they want to focus on incorporating NFT's into not only new games but existing ones on their exchange.  

Although FTX is not number one in trading volume nor traders, it has a lot going for them in comparison to its competitors. Binance is first in volume and users but has come under much scrutiny for past security breaches, money laundering, and tax offenses which is why Binance can no longer conduct business in the United States, United Kingdom, Japan, and Thailand. This makes FTX the safer choice when looking from a security aspect. Coinbase holds the edge over FTX when it comes to users but Coinbase does not offer derivatives trading yet so this puts FTX in a very good space in regards to some of the top exchanges in the world as they continue to grow into every aspect of trading.   

As FTX continues to grow there are a couple of areas that I can see help pave their way to the top. The first would be an IPO offering that would help raise more capital and quickly develop other areas such as FTX Gaming. Also, in the construction world, I see carbon trading to be the next big thing.  Carbon trading is the buying and selling of credits that permit a company to emit a certain amount of carbon dioxide. The idea makes is similar to trading commodities by buying and selling the rights to emit greenhouse gases. Creating these trading platforms could create an entirely new sector such as Defi. It could be an entire market within itself with different tokens representing a different aspect of the commodity such as token sales for renewable energy projects, community projects, and waste-to-energy projects. This in turn will expose FTX to new users and increase their daily volume which should help close the gap to their competitors.

Work Cited:

Google. (2019, June 25). FTT whitepaper (full) June 25. Google Docs. Retrieved March 18, 2022, from https://docs.google.com/document/d/11GAgoD06BH6rvGBlNSUwNGLlauVTvOB_vb97OS4vCio/edit 
Google. (2019, June 25). FTX deck_draft v16.pdf. Google Drive. Retrieved March 18, 2022, from https://drive.google.com/file/d/1zL5iA4-ETkxKLbNBG6FGrtu96yWMHDRV/view 
Hajric, V. (2021, May 10). Upstart Crypto Exchange FTX Surges Toward Top of Trading Ranks. Bloomberg.com. Retrieved March 18, 2022, from https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-05-11/upstart-crypto-exchange-ftx-surges-toward-top-of-trading-ranks 
T, B. (2021, October 19). Binance vs. FTX: Is the competition closer than expected. AMBCrypto. Retrieved March 18, 2022, from https://ambcrypto.com/binance-vs-ftx-is-the-competition-closer-than-expected/ 
Team, T. I. (2022, March 17). What is the carbon trade? Investopedia. Retrieved March 18, 2022, from https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/04/060404.asp 
Wikimedia Foundation. (2022, March 14). FTX (company). Wikipedia. Retrieved March 18, 2022, from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FTX_(company) 
